---
title: "Global renewables by country"
author: "David Leitch"
date: "2024-01-24"
categories: [analysis,global]
image: "media/media/image1.png"
lightbox: true
draft: false
---
Thanks to their hydro and nuclear plants China and the USA are still in
the renewable energy lists. India does very poorly.

![A graph with numbers and a bar Description automatically
generated](media/media/image1.png){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="3.9125in"}

Figure 1 Renewable share Source: IEA, 9 months to Sep 2023.

To an extent the renewable share in total depends on the hydro resource.
You might say that the VRE (variable renewable energy = wind and solar)
share likewise depends on the wind and solar natural endowment but in my
opinion most countries in the world can find some wind and solar if they
want to. Even Japan could do as much offshore wind as it has the
political will for. On this metric Australia does well and is probably
growing share as quickly as anywhere.

By contrast Japan, India and Korea are going to fall behind due to the
inability to get on with the job. USA (despite California and Texas) is
also falling behind.

![](media/media/image2.png){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="3.9125in"}

Figure 2 VRE share. Source: IEA 9 months to Sep 2023

9 Month shares mis some seasonality but in this note it's the rough
direction, rough share and the relativities that are of interest.

Again these numbers are history and don't' necessarily tell us anything
about the future.

# Nuclear in Australia is just an example of the LNP's ability to sell anything to their base provided it doesn't look "left"

I personally compare the LNP's ability to sell nuclear to a religious
view preaching that there is "life after death". There is zero evidence
of life after death and it is contrary to everything we know from
centuries of medical and scientific research but millions profess to
believe in the idea.

Similarly once the LNP agreed that climate change was indeed real and
that decarbonization targets were bipartisan policy then it became
necessary to invent an alternative vision to using wind and solar.
That's because wind and solar are "green" and left. The LNP had
traditionally supported coal but if coal was a problem then whatever the
answer was it certainly couldn't be "wind and solar". So a solution had
to be found and that was nuclear. The practical issues with nuclear
don't matter at all. It was a fuel that the base would not only accept
but rally round. Conveniently Ted O'Brien had long advocated nuclear and
so away he went. In the sharemarket I saw many times over 30 years how
ssmall speculative stocks could exist for 10-20 years on an idea. This
idea might be some new medical technology, a new form of car engine, a
potential gold mine, a hydro plant in New Guinea delivering power to
Sydney. The worst thing the company management could ever do was put the
idea into practice, because then the problems would start. But if you
only talk about it, put an expert in front of the shareholders with a
report and some facts and figures then you could raise enough money to
keep going for years and do it a few times over. Nuclear in Australia is
just like that but with political ideology added in. People a gullible
and will mostly fall for a good story well told that they want to
believe in. We used to say we would start a company "The Golden Shaft",
we get the gold, you get the shaft. But anyway not only do I digress but
equally its worth acknowledging that the fact that Australia doen't need
nuclear and can't afford to wait for nuclear doesn't mean that at some
future time there may not be a role for it. In the meantime the task in
Australia is clear, build the wind and solar, ensure the transmission
and firming are there and then use the decarbonized electricity system
to decarbonize industry and transport. It's a clear achievable plan and
we have been set on the course for a decade already. The problems are
known and the solutions are easy..

# Global and regional trends

So lets look at the global and regional trends, bearing in mind that the
trends can't show policy shifts, won't show the impacts of new plants
under construction or old ones that will shortly be decommissioned.
Trends are interesting but no substitute for informed analysis.

Globally or at least that part of the world within the IEA database, gas
is now the largest fuel source for electricity, largely because of the
USA. Wind and solar have overtaken nuclear and in my view will over take
coal with the next 12-18 months. There are some new nuclear generators
to come in China but equally the new wind and solar being built in China
far exceeds even on a capacity factor adjusted basis, the new nuclear.

![](media/media/image3.png){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="3.86875in"}

Figure 3 IEA all covered countries electricity production. Source: IEA

In OECD Europe VRE is now easily the largest fuel source with the coal
share having more or less halved and nuclear down by 22% from its 2011
peak.

![](media/media/image4.png){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="3.970138888888889in"}

Figure 4 Electricity generation by fuel OECD Europe. Source: IEA 9
months to Sep 23

In the USA gas is dominant and growing. Due to shale gas and the lack of
bipartisan consensus on climate change I expect gas to retain its
dominant position for years. Renewables will soon overtake coal.

![A graph of different colored lines Description automatically
generated](media/media/image5.png){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="3.959722222222222in"}

Figure 5 Electricity generation by fuel USA. Source: IEA 9 months to Sep
23

China and India have a long way to go. Many times do I read how much
solar capacity is added each year in China. And then I look at the
generation shares and feel sorry for the future generations.\
![](media/media/image6.png){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="3.9118055555555555in"}

Figure 6 Electricity generation by fuel China. Source: IEA 9 months to
Sep 23

As for India there is not much positive to say so I will say nothing
except to note that although the population of China and India is
roughly equal China consumes 4-5X the amount of electricity that India
does.

![A graph of a graph showing the price of a company Description
automatically generated with medium
confidence](media/media/image7.png){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="3.8965277777777776in"}

Figure 7 Electricity generation by fuel India. Source: IEA 9 months to
Sep 23
