---
title: "Australia Primary Energy"
author: "David Leitch"
date: "2022-09-24"
categories: ["Energy Transition", "Policy & Regulation", "Market Analysis"]
image: "media/media/image1.png"
lightbox: true
draft: false
---
# Talking Sankey, Sankey 

Its hard to do justice in a reduced copied image of the work that the
Dept Industry, Science, Energy and Resources put into producing a Sankey
diagram of Australian energy flows.

![](media/media/image1.png){width="6.263888888888889in"
height="4.525in"}

Figure 1 Australian energy flows. Source: Dept of energy.

The original document can be found at [Australian Energy Flows
2019-20](https://www.energy.gov.au/sites/default/files/Australian%20Energy%20Flows%202019-20_0.pdf)
along with associated source data. Even without study of the detail and
given that the diagram despite the work could still use a couple of
extra labels one can still see:

(1) The cyan colour (electricity) is fairly small

(2) most of the coal and gas is exported duh and

(3) production losses and "own use" of 1747 PJ are double the 858 PJ of
    electricity production that goes to final energy consumption.

Lets be honest we are so so far from electrifying Australian and
becoming a "renewable energy super power" its almost, but not quite
laughable.

Breaking down and reaggregating energy flow diagram we can see that oil
represents about 50% of final consumptionby fuel and that about 30% of
the coal and gas production for domestic use is self consumed, either in
the process of being extracted or the low thermal efficiency of coal and
gas fuelled electricity generation.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Energy sources                     ** **       ** **      ** **             ** **      ** **
  and uses**                                                                               
  ------------------ ----------------- ----------- ---------- ----------------- ---------- --------
  **PJ**             **Consumption**   **Thermal   **Own      **Electricity**   **Final    share
                                       power**     use**                        demand**   

  Coal               1706              1516        88                           102        2%

  Gas                1643              588         43                           1012       24%

  Oil                2273              46          78                           2149       50%

  Renewables         419               45                     204               170        4%

  Consumption        **6041**                                                              
  (primary energy)                                                                         

  Thermal power                        **2195**    1538       657                          

  Own use                                          **1747**                                

  Electricity                                                 **861**           861        20%

  Final demand                                                                  **4294**   100%
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure 2 Australian energy source and uses. Source: Dept of Energy

It is interesting that when you think about energy rather than
emissions, oil most of which is imported is 50% of the total. Oil is
politically actually the easiest sector to eliminate in Australia, the
one where there are next to no vested interests to deal with, and by
reducing oil consumption, easily done, we can improve our balance of
trade, improve our energy security and decarbonise. I mean come on
Canberra you are there for a good time not a long time. Make it happen.

I don't show it here but a time series look at final demand will show
that compared to 10 years ago, electricity's share is flat to down, gas
share is up. So not good enough.

Then we can move on to look at the composition of final demand by user.
Again lets go with the main aggregates.

Figure 3 Australia final energy consumption. Source: Dept of Energy

The messages here are clear. Transport is the dominant consumer of
energy. It is ironic it's the product we import. Even more ironic it's
the sector we could most easily electrify and yet progress is glacial.

Secondly is to point at mining. Mining is so far not doing the
electrification it needs to even though the mining industry is full of
people interested in the topic. Equally since the vast majority of
mining output is exported its clear that the consumption of coal and gas
within the mining sector as well as its final transport is a major
contributor to Australia's emissions. And so essentially there are lots
of emissions associated with mining and exports. This is not a knock on
mining where Australia is a world leader but an observation on the
opportunity.

# Safeguards scheme -- Do new coal and gas projects make it completely pointless, or merely blunten the impact

As we previously
[opined](https://reneweconomy.com.au/a-first-look-at-federal-labors-emissions-plan-finds-it-wholly-insufficient/)
just after the election, the centre piece of the ALP emissions policy,
as opposed to legislate able but fairly useless target is to tighten the
safeguards scheme to require a fall of about 5 mt per year from a
starting point of 143 mt. So in ten years after the scheme starts those
emissions are supposed to fall by 50 mt reducing overall total
Australian emissions from all sources relative to today by about 10%.

To be frank ITK has doubts about the policy. **Its tackling the hardest
to abate sectors first instead of the easiest to abate sectors**. Still
as we will say several times, we must like Oliver Twist be grateful for
what we are offered because the alternative is worse. And tightening the
safeguards scheme is sound policy, its just the difficult part rather
than the easy pickings available in electricity and transport.

Never mind that 5 mt is less than 1% of emissions that's what's on offer
and because any policy is better than what the Liberal National party
were offering so we should, and to an extent are, grateful.

But not so grateful that we can overlook pointing out what a farce it is
to allow new coal and gas projects at the same time as the existing ones
are required to reduce emissions. Note this is not a statement about
whether new coal or gas projects should go ahead. It's a statement that
requiring existing projects to reduce emissions but at the same time
allowing new projects is fairly pointless and also seemingly unfair to
existing projects. That is unless the new projects pay and pay heavily
for the privilege.

Contrary to what I last wrote coal and gas are not responsible for 25%
of Australia's scope 1 emissions, even though exports of goods and
services , which includes agriculture are about 40% of scope 1
emissions. A little checking shows that coal and gas production,
excluding say coal transport to port, are about 67 mt or 14% of
emissions. And as we show later we could add another 50 mt maybe for the
ocean transport of these products.

  ------------------------------ -------------------- --------------------
  **Scope 1 emissions from                            
  fossil fuel production and                          
  distribution Australia**                            

                                 **mt**               **share total
                                                      emissions**

  coal production                34.5                 7.1%

  gas extraction                 23.9                 4.9%

  petrol and coal product        6.4                  1.3%
  manufacture                                         

  gas supply                     2.3                  0.5%

  **total fossil fuel excluding  **67.1**             **13.7%**
  electricity**                                       

  Total emissions Australia      488.8                

                                                      
  ------------------------------ -------------------- --------------------

Figure 4 Emission by industry. Source: CER

Its still a big number and other sources point to even higher emissions
from gas production.

It takes on even more significance when we look at the safeguards
scheme. The following graph shows a summary by industry of the 53
largest covered emitters, remembering that electricity emitters are
excluded.. Emissions from those 53 facilities total 100 mt out the 143
covered by the scheme and which are subject to the potential 5 mt per
year reduction. I allocated each facility to an industry and I included
Bass Strait in gas.

Figure 5 53 largest emitters summed by industry. Source: CER

I note that the 41.7 mt of gas is almost double what the CER analysis
shows and this may be due to some double counting. The graph only covers
coal mines that made the top 53 largest emitters from all sources. So
most medium and small coal mines are not shown.

Digging into the weeds here is a sorted list of the top 29 emitting
facilities. It's a list dominated by gas.

![](media/media/image3.png){width="6.063439413823272in"
height="5.3086537620297465in"}

Figure 6 Top 29 \"safeguards\" emitters. Source: CER

Another difficulty is that the Govt has stated that all the "export"
industries covered under the safeguard scheme will have "tailored"
treatment. Well guess what. They are pretty well all export oriented. So
if they are all tailored then it seems like we'll have to kiss bye bye
to the 5 mt. And yet there is always a different way to cut the numbers,
particularly given a bunch of bright bureaucrats.

# Shipping coal, gas and oil nearly doubles the emissions from production

Globally shipping of all kinds results in about 1 bt of carbon emissions
a year (ie two Australias) and represents about 2.5% of global
emissions. See [Transport and
Environment](https://www.transportenvironment.org/challenges/ships/greenhouse-gases/)

It turns out that shipping coal gas and oil is around 40% of the total.

Yes you read that right, shipping of coal, gas and oil is over 40% by
weight of all global shipping trade. The numbers come from [United
Nations Conference on Trade and
Development](https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/rmt2019_en.pdf).
To get the emissions from oil tankers its just their share of global
shipping as a share of 1 bn tonnes of global shipping emissions and so
on.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Global                    ** **       ** **           ** **
  shipping                                                
  2018**                                                  
  ------------- ------------- ----------- --------------- ----------------
                **million     **share**   **Emissions     **Australia
                tons**                    mt**            implied**

  Oil tankers   1886          18%         176             1

  LNG           1308          12%         122             26

  Coal          1263          12%         118             32

  **Fossll      **4457**      **42%**     416             
  fuels**                                                 

  Iron ore      1476          14%         138             

  All other     4783          45%         446             

  World total   10716                     1000             
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure 7 Global shipping, emissions and implied australian contribution.
Source: United Nations Conference, Transport and Environment, BP, ITK
derived

The Australian derived contribution to global carbon emissions from the
shipping of fossil fuels produced in Australia is a bit of a stretch.
The method was to work out Australia's share of global trade in each
commodity using the BP data and then to apply that share to the global
emissions from the global sea transport of that product.

The data used to derive the shares is in exajoules

  ------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  **World energy trade**                                        

  **EJ**                    **Coal**    **LNG**     **Oil**     **total**

  Russia                    5.9         2.2         12.0        20.1

  Australia                 9.7         6.0         0.5         16.2

  Saudi Arabia                                      15.0        15.0

  USA                       2.4         2.7         5.8         10.9

  Indonesia                 9.2         0.9         0.3         10.4

  Qatar                                 6.1         1.1         7.2

  All others                8.2         9.7         51.1        69.0

  World                     35.3        27.6        85.8        148.7

  **Australia share**       **27.5%**   **21.7%**   **0.6%**    **10.9%**

  US\$/GJ \*                7.7         10.0        15.4        

  Value US\$ trillion       0.3         0.3         1.3         1.9

  Coal based on US\$200/t                                       
  ------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------

Figure 8 World energy trade. Source BP stats review 2020, ITK
calculations

Based on the above data it appears that in addition to the over 60 mt of
emissions from the domestic production of coal, gas and oil there is
another 50 mt of emissions involved in shipping the product and no doubt
still more emissions in transporting it to the port of export and from
the port of import to where ever its finally consumed.

# Yes Minister 

Your analyst has always appreciated humour, and even if satire is the
lowest form of wit and irony be far superior nevertheless "Yes Minister"
was generally a good jolly.

As an avid student of irony it causes no more than a smile to note that
we have policies like in Victoria where the aluminum smelter (the
consumer) is subsidised and both a fossil fuel part supplier (Yallourn)
and the renewable energy suppliers are also subsidised.

I have gone off reservation bringing in Portland and Victoria only
becauseto demonstrate that the Federal Govt, and no doubt most voters,
are unlikely to see any problem in forcing existing gas producers and
coal producers to reduce emissions by 5 mt per year out of 143 mt total
or say 3% and yet at the same time allowing new coal mines and gas
facilities to start up.

And new gas projects are largely in West Australia. And as far as the
ALP goes what ever West Australia wants in the way of new gas projects
it can have.

# Give us an A, Give us an L but don't take the P

And hurrah, hurrah however timid and contradictory ALP policy is its
better than the Coalition and we will always be grateful. And if I were
in Albanese's place I doubt if I would have the stomach to ban new coal
and gas projects. But what I would do is make them pay heavily for the
cost they are going to impose on the future of the world. I would
frankly tax the guts out of them. And I'd tax the existing projects a
whole lot harder.

Were I advising the ALP my policy prescription would have included:

-   In regard to electricity. Increase the LRET target to say 65% by
    2030 and allow RECs to be used as well as ACCUs to discharge
    "safeguards obligations". Increasing the target to 65% is a way of
    forcing the existing large gentailers to finance more wind and solar
    and takes the burden away from the States.

-   Mark Butler's residential battery program could be revived. It
    dovetails well with AEMO's ISP modelling and would be politically
    popular as well as really useful. I'd also charge the ESB to work on
    a revision of the current NEM functional design that is the
    separation of retail, generation, distribution and transmission. A
    place may need to be found for the large scale deployment of
    community batteries in the way WA is doing it without having to go
    through endless regulatory jumps. In any event some kind of storage
    scheme analogous to the LRET is likely a goer. This would provide
    opportunities for pumped hydro and batteries to compete. Despite the
    ESB analysis I am intuitively drawn to the Californian 4 hour
    capacity credit model as it targets diurnal storage. Diurnal storage
    is clearly the emerging market need once we build the bulk wind and
    solar farms.

-   Legislate vehicle tailpipe emission standards just about the same as
    Europe, maybe with a two year adjustment phase. In my opinion this
    is an easy win for the Govt. Future research will look at how much
    this could save a year in emissions compared to the safeguards
    proposal

-   Put some weight behind 7 star residential building. The built
    environment is a major consumer of energy and carbon emitter. There
    is a ton of work done in this sector already its true and yet the
    perception remains that the overall results are not that flash

-   Raise taxes on coal, gas and oil production. We can do it for
    tobacco we can do it for fossil fuels.
